Hello. So, one quick question for the next speakers. Can you please identify yourself
towards us then? So, Karen, who's the next one? Sarah James. Sarah James. So, if you're
around, then please come to Karen. So, our next speaker here is Luca Bonisi, and he will
talk about one topic when I first saw what he was accomplishing there as one person.
It was amazing. So, and the rest he will talk about, but yeah, it's amazing what one person
was able to do there. Hello. Welcome to Fosman, and welcome to this talk. This talk is about
the right to install any software on your device, on your device, and consequently, what in my
opinion is an unlawful behavior to install, to pre-install software on PC that you normally
install both in your device. Specifically, this software, proprietary software, that are Windows
and Office. I briefly introduced myself. Okay, the images. Sorry. Because the images are missing.
Okay, maybe we can do full screen. Sorry.
Okay. And yes, display, display, how to make a single display.
Okay. Very good. Okay. I introduced myself. My name is Luca Bonisi. I came from Italy.
I am, my main job is developing firmware of electronic devices. And I also support some
school and small office with free software, especially one school that I defined a free
software school where all teachers and students are using free software. I have some hobbies
that are always related to free software. I do video, I am, I am, I do video technicians
where I use a board, Jack, Jamil, Sinaldana, Cappadena live. I play guitar and piano. And
I use Rose Garden as a media player to record from piano. I like to observe celestial objects
like the ISS. This image is the ISS, photographed by me with a normal camera. And I built a
3D printer and I use them mainly for repairing or so forth. I make some free software project
or activity. One is to make a chart on the text of songs since I play piano and guitar
and transpose it automatically. Another is I'm the maintainer of the unofficial porting
of Slackware and Linux distribution for many platform and CPUs. A project that I just started
is to free your Android TV box. I bought cheap Android TV box and I installed Linux to be
used as a general purpose devices. And I am a volunteer of NFSV as a translator. For
NFSV, I built this project that was built in Perl, a language that may be not so used
but I love it. And I built this program to help translate NFSV, to help translation in
the NFSV, the translation process so the translator has not to care about the HTML formatting
and so on. I contribute also at this fantastic book. I mean I maintain the repository of
this free software book. Free software means that this book is distributed with a free
license. And it was translated in five languages actually. German, Ukrainian, Italian, Arabic
and English. The Italian book is not yet published but we wish it will be soon published. And
if you like this book, you can attend the reading of the book this evening at 6 p.m.
and Matias will be the reader, I think. Bonus hobby, I make ice creams. Since the book
talks also about ice cream, it is very related to my hobby. And if you are curious, we will
go to Ubitur this evening. In this presentation, you will find many illustrations like the one
on the right that come from the book. So I sponsor a little bit the book. Okay, we start
with the presentation. We have two different contracts. One is for the hardware and one
is for the software. This contract cannot be joined together. You cannot force to join
the two contracts and to force to give back also the hardware if you ask for the refund.
Because the hardware contract is a sales and purchase agreement. And you become the ownership
of the product or your PC of the product. And nobody can force you to do what you don't
want to do. Instead, the software is a license agreement. You have a right to use the software
under some conditions that for proprietary software, like Windows and Office, are limitations.
Instead, for free software, are freedoms. I talk about device neutrality because you
have the right to choose to install what software you like. Also by installing free software
on your device, you gain the sovereign of your device. Properties software, you don't
know what proprietary software make on your device. What proprietary software connect to
some site that you don't know. Using running free software can overcome software obsolescence.
Because especially with the new version of proprietary software, you are forced to change
your hardware because the new version of proprietary software doesn't run on all the hardware.
Instead, for free software, you can customize like I do with the two boxes and run also
on lower-end devices. And in this way, you extend the hardware lifetime and also you
reduce the electronic impact of the worst. There is also an open letter that the Free
Software Foundation Europe asked to sign for the right to install any software on a device.
The link is this one. Maybe we have a label later. And Free Software Foundation Europe
asked to the European Parliament and Commission and also to public administration to be able
that every device should be independent from the software it runs because using open standards
and open interfaces. This is related to our work because sometimes hardware manufacturers
use this proprietary interface that limits the possibility to use some feature of your
device. Okay, we come first of all technical address. Manufacturers say this is real what
Microsoft says from a device I purchase for the laptop surface I purchase. Microsoft says
that the device would not work properly with other operating systems and they are not supported.
This is said by Microsoft. And this is true because my laptop surface, the touch screen
doesn't work. The webcam doesn't work with new links due to the proprietary interface
of this device. Also, installing the front-stretched new links is not straightforward because
the keyboard and the touchpad doesn't work if you don't build the customizes kernel.
Also, the drivers for the keyboard and the touchpad are not in the main line. But okay,
you can compile and then it works. And the manufacturer could also lock the boot loader.
For example, Microsoft with ARM devices and Windows 8 lock the secure boot in a way that
you cannot install software different than Microsoft Windows. So the device is not really
your because you can only run software certified by another party.
When we come to legal level, manufacturers often say that even if the license say that
you must contact the manufacturers, the manufacturer says that you have to ask the review to the
vendor or to Microsoft. But this is not true because the license agreement says that you
have to contact the manufacturer. Manufacturer says that you must also return the PC. So you
should have all the refund of all PC, both PC and the software. In fact, you can't have
only the software refund. Manufacturer set a very little time span to ask for the refund,
usually only 30 days. Manufacturer says that you must prove you refuse the license. But
it is impossible to prove you refuse the license because when you start the first time Windows,
you have only one button, accept. You cannot even power down the PC. Especially if it is
a laptop, it could be a problem because the battery is integrated, usually integrated,
and you cannot show power off the PC if you don't know that you have to press the power
button for that same cost. Recently, a factory has switched their policy and said that you
must return the PC to their laboratory because you must remove the product that is the information
about the Windows license stored in the BIOS. Manufacturers set a price by your own, not
the market price of the Windows license. When you first run the PC to see the license
agreement, because to refuse the license agreement, you have to see the license agreement. With
the latest Windows session, it is mandatory to connect your PC to the Internet before
viewing the license agreement. I think this could be not compliant to the GDPR because
your PC sends information to manufacturers and to Microsoft sites without your explicit
agreement. There is no refuse button as I already said, and you cannot install a different
license if you remove Windows and you download the Microsoft Windows from Microsoft website
and you want to install a full license or also the gratis license because Windows is
gratis. This is only a limitation that you cannot customize the toolbar. You cannot do
it because when you install the version you downloaded from the Internet, it looks for
the product key. So you are in your search circuits. Okay, very briefly cases of refuelling
in Italy. There was a case in 2005 against HP. The case came to the Supreme Court of
Italy and that said the refund must be given. It's about nine years, it's last to all the
SQL. The second case is similar. It takes also nine years. It's very similar. And this
case is regarding this PC. And I repressed the refund in 2018. Lenovo refused categorically
the refund on the software. They asked that they say that I have to return also the PC.
But I filed a court case by myself without a lawyer initially because from my side it
was clear that Lenovo has won. But Lenovo introduced artificial complexity so that I
cannot continue without a lawyer. So I asked for a lawyer. I win the first grade low seat
but Lenovo immediately filed the second grade, the appeal, the second grade low seat. And
they lost the second grade but the judge of Monza Kurt imposed to Lenovo a punitive damages
of 20,000 euros because they use the legal instruments with bad fate without any valid
reason. Okay, after these cases, I requested also other reasons refund. The case was simpler
but not so easy. Asher, for example, asked to return the PC to remove the product K.
And in this case, since I have some excessive front end, I go with the bike to bring my
PC to Asher. There are also other cases, one with Microsoft as I already said. One with
HP. I filed a court case against HP. They lost the court case. But this case, the judge
does not recognize to me the legal fee. So the balance was the same. I lost what I gained
from the refund. Other cases, okay. This is very interesting the last year with Asher
because when I asked to Asher, this time I need the PC immediately so I cannot wait to
send the PC to Asher and to give it back. And Asher said that it was Microsoft that asked
to send the PC to the manufacturer to remove the product K. Then I filed a court case but
it was stopped by Asher before reaching the first year. So they gave me 129 euros. Latest
case against Lenovo that was terminated three days ago. Lenovo says again that you must
return the PC to the manufacturer and they say that they are not satisfied by the license.
The license they propose, they are not satisfied by the license, they themselves propose. So
it is not very coherent. Okay. Asking for the phone, I go very quickly. You have to power
on the PC, you have to read the license, contact the manufacturer, send email and certified
mail in Italy. And you have to be very patient because many mails you have to send before
requesting the refund, before having the refund. But you will have the refund. Okay. One important
thing is that manufacturers artificially increase the cost of the PC with the mandatory payment
to Microsoft. I think that if you obtain the refund, you have to give part of the refund
to some free software organization. I give all 20,000 euros to this association. And
if you want to donate, you can go to the link down. And if you can support the free software
they value the work. Thank you.
Hello. Is this working now? I think the main problem with this mic is the pickup on it is
substantially lower than the pickup on that.